> This section is not based on reverse engineered data from the machine at the Arithmeum, instead it is essentially a
> partial summary of patent [US4611307](./patents/US4611307-mathatron-latest.pdf)

The number format used throughout the Mathatron is a binary-coded-decimal floating point format. Four bits are used to
store one decimal digit, using the [excess-3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Excess-3) code: The binary pattern
corresponding to a digit `d` is the one that would ordinarily encode `d + 3`. For example, 0 is encoded as `0011`, and 7
is encoded as `1010`. This system has the advantage that nine's complement (the decimal equivalent of one's complement)
for subtraction can be computed by a simple bitwise negation rather than involving "complex" computations. Also,
during addition, the carry bit generated by a digit is simply that generated from an ordinary binary addition: The
(binary) addition result is `a + 3 + b + 3`, which is larger than 15 (binary carry-out) exactly if the sum of the digits
`a + b` exceeds 9 (decimal carry-out).

The format uses 9 decimal digits as the mantissa and 2 decimal digits as the exponent. This corresponds to 44 bits. Of
the remaining 4 bits, one is used as the sign bit, one is unused, and two are used to store "the operation attached to a
number" (see [parentheses handling](./parentheses.md)). This is only the "steady state" format used when numbers are
stored between operations. While operations are performed, the sign bit, the unused bit, and the operation bits may be
used as a tenth digit of the mantissa. Additionally, the exponent is used a general purpose counter in e.g. the
multiplication algorithm.
